README.md, before:

# 🚀 Fedora Edge OS Builder

An automated container image builder for creating lightweight, secure edge computing operating systems using **Fedora bootc**. This project generates container images that can be deployed as bootable operating systems on edge devices.

## 🎯 Key Features

- **🔧 Modern Architecture**: Uses Fedora bootc for container-native OS deployments
- **⚡ Lightweight**: Optimized for edge computing environments
- **🔒 Security-First**: SELinux enabled, hardened configurations, automated security scanning
- **📊 Observability**: Built-in OpenTelemetry stack for comprehensive monitoring
- **⚙️ GitOps Ready**: Version-controlled infrastructure with automated builds
- **🌐 Multi-Platform**: Supports x86_64 and ARM64 architectures

## 🏗️ Architecture Overview

### 🎯 K3s Edge OS (Default & Recommended)

**Primary focus with optimized experience:**

- **Fast Builds**: 8-12 minutes with optimized caching
- **Lightweight**: K3s provides a minimal Kubernetes footprint
- **Automated Builds**: Triggered on every push for continuous integration
- **Smaller Footprint**: ~50MB binary vs complex builds
- **Production Ready**: Battle-tested in edge environments

### 🎯 MicroShift Edge OS (Enterprise Alternative)

**Enterprise-focused Kubernetes for edge with Red Hat ecosystem:**

- **Fast Builds**: 5-8 minutes using pre-built binaries from [microshift-builder](https://github.com/RamaEdge/microshift-builder)
- **Enterprise Ready**: Based on OpenShift, Red Hat support available
- **Manual Builds**: Triggered via workflow_dispatch for controlled deployments
- **Resource Efficient**: Optimized for edge and IoT environments
- **Pre-built Binaries**: Uses container images with compiled MicroShift binaries

**Quick Start:**

```bash
git clone https://github.com/RamaEdge/os-builder.git
cd os-builder/os

# Build K3s locally (recommended)
make build

# Build MicroShift locally (using pre-built binaries)
make build-microshift

# Or use GitHub Actions
# K3s: Automatically triggers on code pushes
# MicroShift: Manual trigger via workflow_dispatch
```

### 📁 Repository Structure

```
os-builder/
├── os/
│   ├── Containerfile.k3s           # K3s optimized build
│   ├── build.sh                    # Build automation script  
│   ├── configs/                    # System configurations
│   │   ├── otelcol/               # OpenTelemetry configs
│   │   └── systemd/               # Service definitions
│   ├── manifests/                 # Kubernetes manifests
│   ├── scripts/                   # Setup and utility scripts
│   └── Makefile                   # Build targets
├── .github/
│   ├── actions/                   # Reusable GitHub Actions
│   └── workflows/                 # CI/CD workflows
│       ├── build-and-security-scan.yaml     # K3s workflow (automated)
│       └── security-scan.yaml               # Security scanning
├── config-examples/               # ISO configuration examples
├── scripts/                       # Build utilities
└── README.md                      # This file
```

## 🚀 Quick Start Guide

### Prerequisites

- **Container Runtime**: Docker (macOS) or Podman (Linux) 
- **Git**: For repository cloning
- **Optional**: .NET SDK with GitVersion for semantic versioning

### 🎯 K3s Edge OS (Recommended)

**Choose your build method:**

1. **Local Build (K3s):**
   ```bash
   cd os-builder/os
   make build
   ```

2. **GitHub Actions (automated on push):**
   - Push to repository
   - Select "Build and Security Scan" workflow
   - Download artifacts when complete

## 📋 Build Options

| Feature | K3s Build (Default) | MicroShift Build | Build Time | Trigger | Use Case |
|---------|---------------------|------------------|------------|---------|----------|
| **Automation** | Fully automated | Manual dispatch | 8-12 min / 5-8 min | Auto on push / Manual | Production, CI/CD / Enterprise |
| **Binary Source** | Downloaded during build | Pre-built from [microshift-builder](https://github.com/RamaEdge/microshift-builder) | - | - | Community / Enterprise |

## 🛠️ Usage Examples

### Local Development

```bash
# Build K3s image locally
cd os-builder/os
make build

# Build MicroShift image locally (using pre-built binaries)
make build-microshift

# Test the image
make test

# Create ISO
make build-iso-interactive
```

### Production Deployment

```bash
# Push to trigger automated K3s build
git push origin main

# Manually trigger MicroShift build
gh workflow run build-microshift.yaml

# Download artifacts from GitHub Actions
# Deploy to edge devices via bootc or ISO
```

### Advanced Options

```bash
# Custom image name and tag
make build IMAGE_NAME=my-edge-os IMAGE_TAG=v2.0.0

# MicroShift with specific version
make build-microshift MICROSHIFT_VERSION=release-4.18

# Different Containerfile
make build CONTAINERFILE=Containerfile.custom
```

## 📦 What's Included

### Core Components (All Builds)

- **Base OS**: Fedora Linux with bootc
- **Security**: SELinux enforcing, firewall configured
- **Networking**: NetworkManager, Cockpit web interface
- **Containers**: Podman runtime for workloads
- **Monitoring**: OpenTelemetry Collector for observability
- **Updates**: Automatic system updates via bootc

### K3s Components

- **Kubernetes**: K3s lightweight distribution
- **Runtime**: containerd with crictl
- **Networking**: Flannel CNI
- **Storage**: Local path provisioner
- **Ingress**: Traefik reverse proxy

### MicroShift Components

- **Kubernetes**: MicroShift (OpenShift-based)
- **Runtime**: CRI-O with crictl
- **Networking**: OVN-Kubernetes CNI
- **Storage**: CSI host path provisioner
- **Ingress**: HAProxy router
- **Source**: Pre-built binaries from [microshift-builder](https://github.com/RamaEdge/microshift-builder)

## 🎯 Use Cases

- **Edge Computing**: Distributed computing at network edge
- **IoT Deployments**: Device management and orchestration
- **Kubernetes Edge**: Lightweight Kubernetes workloads with K3s
- **Development**: Container-native development environments

## 📖 Documentation

- **Getting Started**: See individual `os/README.md` for detailed instructions
- **Workflows**: See `.github/workflows/README.md` for CI/CD documentation
- **Configuration**: See `config-examples/` for ISO configuration examples

## 🤝 Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make your changes
4. Add tests if applicable
5. Submit a pull request

For major changes, please open an issue first to discuss the proposed changes.

## 📚 References

- **Fedora bootc**: [bootc Project](https://github.com/containers/bootc)
- **K3s**: [K3s Documentation](https://k3s.io/)
- **OpenTelemetry**: [OpenTelemetry Documentation](https://opentelemetry.io/)

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.

Commit message:

Update README and build scripts for improved version detection and container runtime clarity
- Replaced references to GitVersion with git for version detection in README and build scripts, simplifying the versioning process.
- Updated container runtime descriptions in README to reflect the use of K3s embedded containerd and CRI-O for MicroShift.
- Enhanced CI workflow to test OpenTelemetry Collector installation and updated paths in health checks and scripts for consistency.
- Adjusted systemd service files and container build scripts to streamline image loading processes and improve service management.

This commit aims to enhance documentation clarity and streamline the build and deployment processes for K3s and MicroShift.

README.md, after:

# 🚀 Fedora Edge OS Builder

An automated container image builder for creating lightweight, secure edge computing operating systems using **Fedora bootc**. This project generates container images that can be deployed as bootable operating systems on edge devices.

## 🎯 Key Features

- **🔧 Modern Architecture**: Uses Fedora bootc for container-native OS deployments
- **⚡ Lightweight**: Optimized for edge computing environments
- **🔒 Security-First**: SELinux enabled, hardened configurations, automated security scanning
- **📊 Observability**: Built-in OpenTelemetry stack for comprehensive monitoring
- **⚙️ GitOps Ready**: Version-controlled infrastructure with automated builds
- **🌐 Multi-Platform**: Supports x86_64 and ARM64 architectures

## 🏗️ Architecture Overview

### 🎯 K3s Edge OS (Default & Recommended)

**Primary focus with optimized experience:**

- **Fast Builds**: 8-12 minutes with optimized caching
- **Lightweight**: K3s provides a minimal Kubernetes footprint
- **Automated Builds**: Triggered on every push for continuous integration
- **Smaller Footprint**: ~50MB binary vs complex builds
- **Production Ready**: Battle-tested in edge environments

### 🎯 MicroShift Edge OS (Enterprise Alternative)

**Enterprise-focused Kubernetes for edge with Red Hat ecosystem:**

- **Fast Builds**: 5-8 minutes using pre-built binaries from [microshift-builder](https://github.com/RamaEdge/microshift-builder)
- **Enterprise Ready**: Based on OpenShift, Red Hat support available
- **Manual Builds**: Triggered via workflow_dispatch for controlled deployments
- **Resource Efficient**: Optimized for edge and IoT environments
- **Pre-built Binaries**: Uses container images with compiled MicroShift binaries

**Quick Start:**

```bash
git clone https://github.com/RamaEdge/os-builder.git
cd os-builder/os

# Build K3s locally (recommended)
make build

# Build MicroShift locally (using pre-built binaries)
make build-microshift

# Or use GitHub Actions
# K3s: Automatically triggers on code pushes
# MicroShift: Manual trigger via workflow_dispatch
```

### 📁 Repository Structure

```
os-builder/
├── os/
│   ├── Containerfile.k3s           # K3s optimized build
│   ├── build.sh                    # Build automation script  
│   ├── configs/                    # System configurations
│   │   ├── otelcol/               # OpenTelemetry configs
│   │   └── systemd/               # Service definitions
│   ├── manifests/                 # Kubernetes manifests
│   ├── scripts/                   # Setup and utility scripts
│   └── Makefile                   # Build targets
├── .github/
│   ├── actions/                   # Reusable GitHub Actions
│   └── workflows/                 # CI/CD workflows
│       ├── build-and-security-scan.yaml     # K3s workflow (automated)
│       └── security-scan.yaml               # Security scanning
├── config-examples/               # ISO configuration examples
├── scripts/                       # Build utilities
└── README.md                      # This file
```

## 🚀 Quick Start Guide

### Prerequisites

- **Container Runtime**: Docker (macOS) or Podman (Linux) 
- **Git**: For repository cloning
- **Optional**: Git for version detection

### 🎯 K3s Edge OS (Recommended)

**Choose your build method:**

1. **Local Build (K3s):**
   ```bash
   cd os-builder/os
   make build
   ```

2. **GitHub Actions (automated on push):**
   - Push to repository
   - Select "Build and Security Scan" workflow
   - Download artifacts when complete

## 📋 Build Options

| Feature | K3s Build (Default) | MicroShift Build | Build Time | Trigger | Use Case |
|---------|---------------------|------------------|------------|---------|----------|
| **Automation** | Fully automated | Manual dispatch | 8-12 min / 5-8 min | Auto on push / Manual | Production, CI/CD / Enterprise |
| **Binary Source** | Downloaded during build | Pre-built from [microshift-builder](https://github.com/RamaEdge/microshift-builder) | - | - | Community / Enterprise |

## 🛠️ Usage Examples

### Local Development

```bash
# Build K3s image locally
cd os-builder/os
make build

# Build MicroShift image locally (using pre-built binaries)
make build-microshift

# Test the image
make test

# Create ISO
make build-iso-interactive
```

### Production Deployment

```bash
# Push to trigger automated K3s build
git push origin main

# Manually trigger MicroShift build
gh workflow run build-microshift.yaml

# Download artifacts from GitHub Actions
# Deploy to edge devices via bootc or ISO
```

### Advanced Options

```bash
# Custom image name and tag
make build IMAGE_NAME=my-edge-os IMAGE_TAG=v2.0.0

# MicroShift with specific version
make build-microshift MICROSHIFT_VERSION=release-4.18

# Different Containerfile
make build CONTAINERFILE=Containerfile.custom
```

## 📦 What's Included

### Core Components (All Builds)

- **Base OS**: Fedora Linux with bootc
- **Security**: SELinux enforcing, firewall configured
- **Networking**: NetworkManager, Cockpit web interface
- **Containers**: Podman runtime for workloads
- **Monitoring**: OpenTelemetry Collector for observability
- **Updates**: Automatic system updates via bootc

### K3s Components

- **Kubernetes**: K3s lightweight distribution
- **Runtime**: K3s with embedded containerd (K3s) or CRI-O (MicroShift)
- **Networking**: Flannel CNI
- **Storage**: Local path provisioner
- **Ingress**: Traefik reverse proxy

### MicroShift Components

- **Kubernetes**: MicroShift (OpenShift-based)
- **Runtime**: CRI-O with crictl
- **Networking**: OVN-Kubernetes CNI
- **Storage**: CSI host path provisioner
- **Ingress**: HAProxy router
- **Source**: Pre-built binaries from [microshift-builder](https://github.com/RamaEdge/microshift-builder)

## 🎯 Use Cases

- **Edge Computing**: Distributed computing at network edge
- **IoT Deployments**: Device management and orchestration
- **Kubernetes Edge**: Lightweight Kubernetes workloads with K3s
- **Development**: Container-native development environments

## 📖 Documentation

- **Getting Started**: See individual `os/README.md` for detailed instructions
- **Workflows**: See `.github/workflows/README.md` for CI/CD documentation
- **Configuration**: See `config-examples/` for ISO configuration examples

## 🤝 Contributing

1. Fork the repository
2. Create a feature branch
3. Make your changes
4. Add tests if applicable
5. Submit a pull request

For major changes, please open an issue first to discuss the proposed changes.

## 📚 References

- **Fedora bootc**: [bootc Project](https://github.com/containers/bootc)
- **K3s**: [K3s Documentation](https://k3s.io/)
- **OpenTelemetry**: [OpenTelemetry Documentation](https://opentelemetry.io/)

## 📄 License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details.
