.github/actions/README.md, before:

# GitHub Actions

This directory contains reusable GitHub Actions for the OS Builder project.

## Available Actions

### 🏷️ calculate-version

**Purpose**: Calculate semantic version based on Git history and branch information.

**Usage**:

```yaml
- name: Calculate version
  id: version
  uses: ./.github/actions/calculate-version
```

**Outputs**:

- `version`: Calculated semantic version
- `branch`: Current branch name
- `sha`: Short commit SHA
- `repository-owner`: Repository owner in lowercase

**Version Strategy**:

- **Main Branch**: `1.2.3` (release) or `1.2.3-dev.5+abc1234` (pre-release)
- **Release Branch**: `1.3.0-rc.2+abc1234` (release candidate)
- **Pull Request**: `1.2.3-pr.42.feature-branch` (clean PR version)
- **Feature Branch**: `1.2.3-feature-branch.3+abc1234` (feature version)

### 📦 build-container

**Purpose**: Build container image with intelligent reuse, optimized caching, and proper OCI labeling.

**Usage**:

```yaml
- name: Build container image
  id: build
  uses: ./.github/actions/build-container
  with:
    containerfile: 'Containerfile.k3s'
    image-name: 'my-app'
    version: ${{ steps.version.outputs.version }}
    sha: ${{ steps.version.outputs.sha }}
    registry: 'harbor.local'
    repository-owner: 'myorg'
    k3s-version: 'v1.32.5+k3s1'       # optional
    otel-version: '0.115.1'           # optional
    fedora-version: '42'              # optional
    microshift-version: 'release-4.19'  # optional
    enable-cache: 'true'              # optional
```

**Key Inputs**:

- `containerfile` (required): Path to Containerfile
- `image-name` (required): Container image name  
- `version` (required): Version tag for the image
- `sha` (required): Git commit SHA
- `registry` (required): Container registry
- `repository-owner` (required): Repository owner
- `k3s-version` (optional): K3s version for K3s builds
- `otel-version` (optional): OpenTelemetry version
- `fedora-version` (optional): Fedora base version
- `microshift-version` (optional): MicroShift version for MicroShift builds
- `enable-cache` (optional): Enable build cache (default: `true`)

**Outputs**:

- `image-id`: Built/pulled image ID  
- `image-ref`: Container image reference (registry/name:tag)

**Smart Build Process**:

1. **🔍 Check Registry**: Checks if image exists in container registry
2. **⬇️ Pull Existing**: Pulls and tags existing image if found
3. **🔨 Build New**: Only builds if image doesn't exist in registry
4. **📦 Cache Optimization**: Uses layer cache when building
5. **✅ Validation**: Ensures image is ready for subsequent actions

**Features**:

- **⚡ Intelligent Reuse**: Avoids unnecessary rebuilds (~90% time savings)
- **🔄 Registry-First**: Checks container registry for existing images
- **📦 Optimized Caching**: Uses latest tag for build layer cache
- **🏷️ OCI-Compliant Labels**: Full container metadata and provenance
- **🔧 Multi-Platform Support**: K3s, MicroShift, and bootc builds  
- **🛡️ Robust Validation**: Comprehensive error checking and output validation
- **📋 Clear Reporting**: Detailed status (pulled-registry, built-new)

### 🛡️ trivy-scan (Container Vulnerability Scanning)

**Purpose**: Container image vulnerability scanning via tar export for consistent, reproducible results.

**Usage**:

```yaml
# Container vulnerability scanning
- name: Container security scan
  uses: ./.github/actions/trivy-scan
  with:
    scan-ref: 'myregistry/myimage:latest'
    severity: 'CRITICAL,HIGH'
    upload-sarif: 'true'
    sarif-category: 'trivy-container'
    output-format: 'sarif'
```

**Scan Approach**:

- **Container-only**: Focused exclusively on container image vulnerability scanning
- **Tar export method**: Exports container to tar file for consistent scanning
- **Vulnerability-only**: No secret scanning or misconfiguration checks

**Key Inputs**:

- `scan-ref` (required): Container image reference to scan
- `severity` (optional): Vulnerability levels (default: `CRITICAL,HIGH`)
- `output-format` (optional): Output format - `table`, `sarif`, `json` (default: `table`)
- `output-file` (optional): Output file path (for sarif/json formats)
- `upload-sarif` (optional): Upload to GitHub Security tab (default: `false`)
- `sarif-category` (optional): Category for GitHub Security organization

**Features**:

- **Tar export scanning**: Consistent results via container image export
- **Runtime detection**: Auto-detects podman/docker for image export
- **SARIF integration**: Direct upload to GitHub Security tab
- **Automatic cleanup**: Temporary tar files automatically removed
- **Performance optimized**: 30-minute timeout for large images
- **Vulnerability focus**: Only scans for security vulnerabilities
- **Optimized configuration**: Uses `.trivy.yaml` for consistent scanning behavior

**Trivy Configuration**:

The action uses a centralized `.trivy.yaml` configuration file that provides:

- **Comprehensive severity scanning**: CRITICAL, HIGH, and MEDIUM vulnerabilities
- **Smart skip patterns**: Excludes unnecessary directories and files
- **Performance optimization**: 30-minute timeout and efficient caching
- **Consistent results**: Same configuration across all scanning operations
- **Easy customization**: Add ignore policies when needed via `.trivyignore`

### 🧪 test-container

**Purpose**: High-performance testing of container images with single-instance execution and comprehensive validation.

**Usage**:

```yaml
# K3s container testing
- name: Test K3s container
  uses: ./.github/actions/test-container
  with:
    image-ref: ${{ steps.build.outputs.image-ref }}
    test-type: 'k3s'

# MicroShift container testing  
- name: Test MicroShift container
  uses: ./.github/actions/test-container
  with:
    image-ref: ${{ steps.build.outputs.image-ref }}
    test-type: 'microshift'

# Security scanning
- name: Container security scan
  uses: ./.github/actions/trivy-scan
  with:
    scan-ref: ${{ steps.build.outputs.image-ref }}
    severity: 'CRITICAL,HIGH'
```

**Supported Test Types**:

- `k3s` - K3s-specific tests (binary, kubectl, otelcol, manifests)
- `microshift` - MicroShift-specific tests (binary, kubectl, manifests directory)
- `bootc` - Base bootc tests only (bootc status, systemd)

**Key Inputs**:

- `image-ref` (required): Container image reference to test
- `test-type` (required): Type of tests to run (`k3s`, `microshift`, `bootc`)

**Outputs**:

- `test_results`: Summary of test results (`total=N,passed=N,failed=N`)

**Optimized Test Execution**:

1. **🚀 Single Container**: Starts one container instance with `sleep infinity`
2. **⚡ Fast Execution**: All tests run via `exec` in same container (~5x faster)
3. **🧹 Auto Cleanup**: Container automatically stopped and removed
4. **🔍 Debug Output**: Failed tests show command output for troubleshooting
5. **✅ Isolated Tests**: Each test type only runs appropriate components

**Features**:

- **⚡ Performance Optimized**: ~85% reduction in container overhead  
- **🔧 Runtime Detection**: Auto-detects podman/docker
- **🎯 Type-Specific Testing**: Tests only match container capabilities
- **📊 Comprehensive Reporting**: Detailed test summaries with failure tracking
- **🛡️ Robust Error Handling**: Enhanced debugging and graceful cleanup
- **🔄 Trap-Based Cleanup**: Ensures container cleanup even on interruption

### 📀 build-iso

**Purpose**: Build bootable ISO images from container images using bootc-image-builder.

**Usage**:

```yaml
# Basic ISO build
- name: Build ISO
  uses: ./.github/actions/build-iso
  with:
    image-ref: 'myregistry/myimage:latest'
    config: 'user'
    output-dir: 'iso-output'

# Custom configuration ISO build
- name: Build custom ISO
  uses: ./.github/actions/build-iso
  with:
    image-ref: 'myregistry/myimage:latest'
    config-file: 'custom-config.toml'
    output-dir: 'custom-iso'
    working-path: './os'
```

**Supported Configurations**:

- `minimal` - Minimal ISO configuration
- `user` - Standard user configuration (default)
- `advanced` - Advanced configuration with extra features
- `interactive` - Interactive installation ISO
- `production` - Production-ready configuration

**Key Inputs**:

- `image-ref` (required): Container image reference to build ISO from
- `config` (optional): ISO configuration type (default: `user`)
- `config-file` (optional): Custom path to configuration TOML file
- `output-dir` (optional): Output directory for ISO files (default: `iso-output`)
- `working-path` (optional): Working directory containing config-examples (default: `./os`)

**Outputs**:

- `iso-path`: Path to generated ISO file
- `iso-size`: Size of generated ISO file
- `config-used`: Configuration file used for build

**Features**:

- **Runtime detection**: Auto-detects podman/docker for building
- **Configuration validation**: Verifies config files exist before building
- **Automatic setup**: Creates output directories and validates environment
- **Local image support**: Handles local and registry images
- **Detailed reporting**: ISO size, location, and build configuration

## Workflow Integration

### K3s Build Workflow (`build-and-security-scan.yaml`)

- **Action-based**: Uses calculate-version, build-container, trivy-scan, test-container, and build-iso actions
- **Parallel execution**: Build, security scan, and test jobs run independently
- **Automated**: Triggers on push, PR, and schedule
- **Efficient**: Matrix ISO builds only for dispatch, single "user" config for regular builds
- **Smart testing**: Container testing only for PRs using test-container action

### MicroShift Build Workflow (`build-microshift.yaml`)

- **Streamlined**: Uses all reusable actions for consistency
- **Action-powered**: build-container, trivy-scan, test-container, and build-iso
- **Manual**: Workflow dispatch only with default MicroShift version
- **Simplified**: No complex version mapping, direct user input

### Integrated Security Scanning

- **Built-in**: Security scanning integrated into build workflows
- **Container-focused**: Only scans container images via tar export
- **Efficient**: No separate security workflow needed

### Dependency Update Workflow (`dependency-update.yaml`)

- **Matrix strategy**: Single job handles both K3s and OTEL version checks
- **Automated PRs**: GitHub CLI-based PR creation
- **Consolidated**: Shared logic for version checking and updates

## Design Benefits

### 🚀 Performance

- **Registry-based optimization**: ~90% time savings through registry image reuse
- **Container testing efficiency**: ~85% reduction in container overhead via single-instance execution
- **Reduced complexity**: 80-90% fewer lines in workflows and action code
- **Better caching**: Layer cache optimization and intelligent cache usage
- **Streamlined security scanning**: Optimized Trivy configuration with smart skip patterns
- **Consolidated processes**: Single-step actions reduce overhead and complexity

### 🔧 Maintainability

- **Single source of truth**: Centralized action logic for all major operations
- **Matrix strategies**: Reduced code duplication across workflows
- **Simplified patterns**: Consistent structure across all workflows
- **Reusable components**: test-container and build-iso actions eliminate duplication
- **Unified interfaces**: Consistent input/output patterns across actions

### 📊 Standardization

- **Consistent versioning**: Unified version calculation
- **Container-focused scanning**: Single trivy-scan action for vulnerability scanning
- **Uniform labeling**: OCI-compliant container labels
- **Standard testing**: Consistent test patterns across K3s and MicroShift
- **Unified ISO building**: Same action for all configuration types

## Migration Benefits

The comprehensive action-based approach provides:

1. **Dramatic Simplification**: 80-90% reduction in workflow complexity
2. **Better Performance**: Faster builds, parallel testing, and reduced resource usage
3. **Easier Maintenance**: Centralized logic in 5 reusable actions
4. **Matrix Efficiency**: Single jobs handle multiple configurations
5. **Streamlined Testing**: Unified test-container action with parallel execution
6. **Consistent ISO Building**: Single build-iso action for all configurations
7. **Complete Coverage**: All major operations (version, build, scan, test, ISO) in actions
8. **Better Error Handling**: Comprehensive validation and detailed reporting

Commit message:

feat: Introduce comprehensive testing script for bootc container images - Added a new test-container script to validate K3s, MicroShift, and bootc functionality, improved action documentation, and refined cleanup mechanisms for better reliability during test execution.

.github/actions/README.md, after:

# GitHub Actions

This directory contains reusable GitHub Actions for the OS Builder project.

## Available Actions

### 🏷️ calculate-version

**Purpose**: Calculate semantic version based on Git history and branch information.

**Usage**:

```yaml
- name: Calculate version
  id: version
  uses: ./.github/actions/calculate-version
```

**Outputs**:

- `version`: Calculated semantic version
- `branch`: Current branch name
- `sha`: Short commit SHA
- `repository-owner`: Repository owner in lowercase

**Version Strategy**:

- **Main Branch**: `1.2.3` (release) or `1.2.3-dev.5+abc1234` (pre-release)
- **Release Branch**: `1.3.0-rc.2+abc1234` (release candidate)
- **Pull Request**: `1.2.3-pr.42.feature-branch` (clean PR version)
- **Feature Branch**: `1.2.3-feature-branch.3+abc1234` (feature version)

### 📦 build-container

**Purpose**: Build container image with intelligent reuse, optimized caching, and proper OCI labeling.

**Usage**:

```yaml
- name: Build container image
  id: build
  uses: ./.github/actions/build-container
  with:
    containerfile: 'Containerfile.k3s'
    image-name: 'my-app'
    version: ${{ steps.version.outputs.version }}
    sha: ${{ steps.version.outputs.sha }}
    registry: 'harbor.local'
    repository-owner: 'myorg'
    k3s-version: 'v1.32.5+k3s1'       # optional
    otel-version: '0.115.1'           # optional
    fedora-version: '42'              # optional
    microshift-version: 'release-4.19'  # optional
    enable-cache: 'true'              # optional
```

**Key Inputs**:

- `containerfile` (required): Path to Containerfile
- `image-name` (required): Container image name  
- `version` (required): Version tag for the image
- `sha` (required): Git commit SHA
- `registry` (required): Container registry
- `repository-owner` (required): Repository owner
- `k3s-version` (optional): K3s version for K3s builds
- `otel-version` (optional): OpenTelemetry version
- `fedora-version` (optional): Fedora base version
- `microshift-version` (optional): MicroShift version for MicroShift builds
- `enable-cache` (optional): Enable build cache (default: `true`)

**Outputs**:

- `image-id`: Built/pulled image ID  
- `image-ref`: Container image reference (registry/name:tag)

**Smart Build Process**:

1. **🔍 Check Registry**: Checks if image exists in container registry
2. **⬇️ Pull Existing**: Pulls and tags existing image if found
3. **🔨 Build New**: Only builds if image doesn't exist in registry
4. **📦 Cache Optimization**: Uses layer cache when building
5. **✅ Validation**: Ensures image is ready for subsequent actions

**Features**:

- **⚡ Intelligent Reuse**: Avoids unnecessary rebuilds (~90% time savings)
- **🔄 Registry-First**: Checks container registry for existing images
- **📦 Optimized Caching**: Uses latest tag for build layer cache
- **🏷️ OCI-Compliant Labels**: Full container metadata and provenance
- **🔧 Multi-Platform Support**: K3s, MicroShift, and bootc builds  
- **🛡️ Robust Validation**: Comprehensive error checking and output validation
- **📋 Clear Reporting**: Detailed status (pulled-registry, built-new)

### 🛡️ trivy-scan (Container Vulnerability Scanning)

**Purpose**: Container image vulnerability scanning via tar export for consistent, reproducible results.

**Usage**:

```yaml
# Container vulnerability scanning
- name: Container security scan
  uses: ./.github/actions/trivy-scan
  with:
    scan-ref: 'myregistry/myimage:latest'
    severity: 'CRITICAL,HIGH'
    upload-sarif: 'true'
    sarif-category: 'trivy-container'
    output-format: 'sarif'
```

**Scan Approach**:

- **Container-only**: Focused exclusively on container image vulnerability scanning
- **Tar export method**: Exports container to tar file for consistent scanning
- **Vulnerability-only**: No secret scanning or misconfiguration checks

**Key Inputs**:

- `scan-ref` (required): Container image reference to scan
- `severity` (optional): Vulnerability levels (default: `CRITICAL,HIGH`)
- `output-format` (optional): Output format - `table`, `sarif`, `json` (default: `table`)
- `output-file` (optional): Output file path (for sarif/json formats)
- `upload-sarif` (optional): Upload to GitHub Security tab (default: `false`)
- `sarif-category` (optional): Category for GitHub Security organization

**Features**:

- **Tar export scanning**: Consistent results via container image export
- **Runtime detection**: Auto-detects podman/docker for image export
- **SARIF integration**: Direct upload to GitHub Security tab
- **Automatic cleanup**: Temporary tar files automatically removed
- **Performance optimized**: 30-minute timeout for large images
- **Vulnerability focus**: Only scans for security vulnerabilities
- **Optimized configuration**: Uses `.trivy.yaml` for consistent scanning behavior

**Trivy Configuration**:

The action uses a centralized `.trivy.yaml` configuration file that provides:

- **Comprehensive severity scanning**: CRITICAL, HIGH, and MEDIUM vulnerabilities
- **Smart skip patterns**: Excludes unnecessary directories and files
- **Performance optimization**: 30-minute timeout and efficient caching
- **Consistent results**: Same configuration across all scanning operations
- **Easy customization**: Add ignore policies when needed via `.trivyignore`

### 🧪 test-container

**Purpose**: High-performance testing of container images with single-instance execution and comprehensive validation.

**Usage**:

```yaml
# K3s container testing
- name: Test K3s container
  uses: ./.github/actions/test-container
  with:
    image-ref: ${{ steps.build.outputs.image-ref }}
    test-type: 'k3s'

# MicroShift container testing  
- name: Test MicroShift container
  uses: ./.github/actions/test-container
  with:
    image-ref: ${{ steps.build.outputs.image-ref }}
    test-type: 'microshift'

# Security scanning
- name: Container security scan
  uses: ./.github/actions/trivy-scan
  with:
    scan-ref: ${{ steps.build.outputs.image-ref }}
    severity: 'CRITICAL,HIGH'
```

**Supported Test Types**:

- `k3s` - K3s-specific tests (binary, kubectl, otelcol, manifests)
- `microshift` - MicroShift-specific tests (binary, kubectl, manifests directory)
- `bootc` - Base bootc tests only (bootc status, systemd)

**Key Inputs**:

- `image-ref` (required): Container image reference to test
- `test-type` (required): Type of tests to run (`k3s`, `microshift`, `bootc`)

**Outputs**:

- `test_results`: Summary of test results (`total=N,passed=N,failed=N`)

**Optimized Test Execution**:

1. **🚀 Single Container**: Starts one container instance with `sleep infinity`
2. **⚡ Fast Execution**: All tests run via `exec` in same container (~5x faster)
3. **🧹 Reliable Cleanup**: Trap-based cleanup ensures containers are always removed
4. **🔍 Debug Output**: Failed tests show command output for troubleshooting
5. **✅ Isolated Tests**: Each test type only runs appropriate components

**Architecture**:

- **Action YAML**: Simple wrapper that executes the test script
- **Test Script**: `test-container.sh` contains all test logic and can be run locally
- **Modular Tests**: Separate test functions for common, K3s, MicroShift, and bootc validation

**Features**:

- **⚡ Performance Optimized**: ~85% reduction in container overhead  
- **🔧 Runtime Detection**: Auto-detects podman/docker
- **🎯 Type-Specific Testing**: Tests only match container capabilities
- **📊 Comprehensive Reporting**: Detailed test summaries with failure tracking
- **🛡️ Robust Error Handling**: Enhanced debugging and graceful cleanup
- **🔄 Robust Cleanup**: Single trap-based cleanup prevents double cleanup issues
- **🧪 Local Testing**: Standalone script can be executed locally for development

### 📀 build-iso

**Purpose**: Build bootable ISO images from container images using bootc-image-builder.

**Usage**:

```yaml
# Basic ISO build
- name: Build ISO
  uses: ./.github/actions/build-iso
  with:
    image-ref: 'myregistry/myimage:latest'
    config: 'user'
    output-dir: 'iso-output'

# Custom configuration ISO build
- name: Build custom ISO
  uses: ./.github/actions/build-iso
  with:
    image-ref: 'myregistry/myimage:latest'
    config-file: 'custom-config.toml'
    output-dir: 'custom-iso'
    working-path: './os'
```

**Supported Configurations**:

- `minimal` - Minimal ISO configuration
- `user` - Standard user configuration (default)
- `advanced` - Advanced configuration with extra features
- `interactive` - Interactive installation ISO
- `production` - Production-ready configuration

**Key Inputs**:

- `image-ref` (required): Container image reference to build ISO from
- `config` (optional): ISO configuration type (default: `user`)
- `config-file` (optional): Custom path to configuration TOML file
- `output-dir` (optional): Output directory for ISO files (default: `iso-output`)
- `working-path` (optional): Working directory containing config-examples (default: `./os`)

**Outputs**:

- `iso-path`: Path to generated ISO file
- `iso-size`: Size of generated ISO file
- `config-used`: Configuration file used for build

**Features**:

- **Runtime detection**: Auto-detects podman/docker for building
- **Configuration validation**: Verifies config files exist before building
- **Automatic setup**: Creates output directories and validates environment
- **Local image support**: Handles local and registry images
- **Detailed reporting**: ISO size, location, and build configuration

## Workflow Integration

### K3s Build Workflow (`build-and-security-scan.yaml`)

- **Action-based**: Uses calculate-version, build-container, trivy-scan, test-container, and build-iso actions
- **Parallel execution**: Build, security scan, and test jobs run independently
- **Automated**: Triggers on push, PR, and schedule
- **Efficient**: Matrix ISO builds only for dispatch, single "user" config for regular builds
- **Smart testing**: Container testing only for PRs using test-container action

### MicroShift Build Workflow (`build-microshift.yaml`)

- **Streamlined**: Uses all reusable actions for consistency
- **Action-powered**: build-container, trivy-scan, test-container, and build-iso
- **Manual**: Workflow dispatch only with default MicroShift version
- **Simplified**: No complex version mapping, direct user input

### Integrated Security Scanning

- **Built-in**: Security scanning integrated into build workflows
- **Container-focused**: Only scans container images via tar export
- **Efficient**: No separate security workflow needed

### Dependency Update Workflow (`dependency-update.yaml`)

- **Matrix strategy**: Single job handles both K3s and OTEL version checks
- **Automated PRs**: GitHub CLI-based PR creation
- **Consolidated**: Shared logic for version checking and updates

## Design Benefits

### 🚀 Performance

- **Registry-based optimization**: ~90% time savings through registry image reuse
- **Container testing efficiency**: ~85% reduction in container overhead via single-instance execution
- **Reduced complexity**: 80-90% fewer lines in workflows and action code
- **Better caching**: Layer cache optimization and intelligent cache usage
- **Streamlined security scanning**: Optimized Trivy configuration with smart skip patterns
- **Consolidated processes**: Single-step actions reduce overhead and complexity

### 🔧 Maintainability

- **Single source of truth**: Centralized action logic for all major operations
- **Matrix strategies**: Reduced code duplication across workflows
- **Simplified patterns**: Consistent structure across all workflows
- **Reusable components**: test-container and build-iso actions eliminate duplication
- **Unified interfaces**: Consistent input/output patterns across actions

### 📊 Standardization

- **Consistent versioning**: Unified version calculation
- **Container-focused scanning**: Single trivy-scan action for vulnerability scanning
- **Uniform labeling**: OCI-compliant container labels
- **Standard testing**: Consistent test patterns across K3s and MicroShift
- **Unified ISO building**: Same action for all configuration types

## Migration Benefits

The comprehensive action-based approach provides:

1. **Dramatic Simplification**: 80-90% reduction in workflow complexity
2. **Better Performance**: Faster builds, parallel testing, and reduced resource usage
3. **Easier Maintenance**: Centralized logic in 5 reusable actions
4. **Matrix Efficiency**: Single jobs handle multiple configurations
5. **Streamlined Testing**: Unified test-container action with parallel execution
6. **Consistent ISO Building**: Single build-iso action for all configurations
7. **Complete Coverage**: All major operations (version, build, scan, test, ISO) in actions
8. **Better Error Handling**: Comprehensive validation and detailed reporting
